Adding AlphaFold 3 documentation (#171)
stanford-rc/www.sherlock.stanford.edu: src/docs/software/using/alphafold.md

    email address will not work and your request will be rejected.
    
2. Download the model parameters to Sherlock.

    Once your access is approved by Google DeepMind, you will receive a link
    to download the model parameters file, `af3.bin.zst`. It is recommended to
    download the model parameters to `$HOME`. The file is ~1 GB in size.
    
    ```
    $ mkdir $HOME/af3_model
    $ cd $HOME/af3_model
    $ wget <personal_download_link>
    ```
    You can make a copy of your model parameters to `$SCRATCH`, which will
    have faster performance when running AlphaFold 3.
    
    ```
    $ cp -R $HOME/af3_model $SCRATCH
    ```
    
3. Clone the AlphaFold 3 GitHub Repo into `$GROUP_HOME`

    ```
    $ mkdir -p $GROUP_HOME/$USER
    $ cd $GROUP_HOME/$USER
    $ git clone https://github.com/google-deepmind/alphafold3.git
    ```
    
4. Download the Databases to `$SCRATCH` or `$GROUP_SCRATCH`.

    For faster performance, you will need a copy of the AlphaFold 3 databases
    in `$SCRATCH` or `$GROUP_SCRATCH`. You can use the following template to
    create a batch job for downloading the databases.
    
    ```
    #!/bin/bash
    #SBATCH -t 5:00:00
    

>     bash fetch_databases.sh $SCRATCH/af3_db

Reviewer: Ah yes, that's correct and needs to be fixed,

    ```
    
    This script assumes that you are submitting the job from within the 
    GitHub repository that you cloned into `$GROUP_HOME/$USER`. Feel free to
    modify the script if you want to use your own partition, download to a
    different location, or submit the job from a different directory. The
    database will take approximately 1 hour to download, you may proceed to
    the next step while it completes.
    
    Although unmodified files are purged from `$SCRATCH` and `$GROUP_SCRATCH`
    every 90 days, Stanford Research Computing maintains a copy of the
    AlphaFold 3 databases within the Oak Common Datasets Repository. As you run
    AlphaFold, you can include a `dcp` in your scripts that compares your
    `$SCRATCH` databases with those on `$OAK` and automatically copies over
    any missing files.
    
6. Build the AlphaFold 3 Apptainer Image

    Container software like Apptainer allow researchers to easily "contain"
    or package software and port it between compute platforms. The following
    commands will allow you to build your own copy of AlphaFold 3 into
    a `.sif` file, or container image.
    

>     ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    ``` none
```

    $ sh_dev -m 12GB
    
    $ cd $GROUP_HOME/$USER/alphafold3

>     

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

>     $ wget https://gist.githubusercontent.com/cagancayco/a71ae18ab5044e14526e0c83becaf647/raw/9f6104366d59fa9a96bb92693cfa60930184c981/af3.def

Reviewer 2: What about hosting this here in the documentation? Either by having the full `.def` file inline in the page, like we do here https://www.sherlock.stanford.edu/docs/user-guide/running-jobs/#recurring-job-example?

Ultimately, it may be even better to pre-build the container and make it available through a module or something, so users wouldn't have to build it themselves? Any downsides to that approach?

>     

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

    $ apptainer build af3.sif af3.def

>     

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

### Running AlphaFold 3 on Sherlock

1. Set up your input and output directories

    Create directories for AlphaFold 3 inputs and outputs in `$SCRATCH` or
    `$GROUP_SCRATCH`.
    
    ```
    $ mkdir -p $SCRATCH/af_input
    $ mkdir -p $SCRATCH/af_output
    ```
    
    The input directory is where you will put the `.json` files containing your input sequence.
    
2. Write and submit a batch script for running the AlphaFold 3 pipeline.

    Running AlphaFold 3 can be broken down into two parts: pipeline and
    inference. The pipeline refers to the genetic sequence search/template 
    search, and inference refers to predicting structures. GPU's are only 
    utilized during inference, so we are going to run the pipeline on CPUs.
    You can use the following batch script as a template. 

    In order to run the pipeline step on a particular sequence, the bash variable
    `INPUT_JSON` needs to be set to the filename of the input `.json` file
    you would like to fold, and the `.json` file needs to be placed in the `af_input`
    directory. In the template below the example input file is `fold_input_2PV7.json`.
    
    ```
    #!/bin/bash

>     #SBATCH --partition=normal

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
We can remove that, since it's the default.

Reviewer: I like putting the partition explicitly in the sbatch script because it's visual marker to the inexperienced user of what they need to change if they want to run in a different partition.  

It's just a little bit of hand holding that may reduce user anxiety and  tickets.

Reviewer 2: Ok, that makes sense, I can see the point, thanks for the clarification!

    #SBATCH --cpus-per-task=8
    #SBATCH --mem=20G
    #SBATCH --time=0-01:00:00

    # model and database paths variables
    MODEL_PARAMS_PATH=$SCRATCH/af3_model
    DB_PATH=$SCRATCH/af3_db
    INPUT_JSON=fold_input_2PV7.json
    

>     # run alphafold3 singularity container

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    # run alphafold3 apptainer container
```

>     singularity run \

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    apptainer run \
```
We should probably only refer to `apptainer` through the page, since that's the official name of the tool now.

         --nv \
         --bind $SCRATCH/af_input:/root/af_input \
         --bind $SCRATCH/af_output:/root/af_output \
         --bind $MODEL_PARAMS_PATH:/root/models \
         --bind $DB_PATH:/root/public_databases \
         af3.sif \
         --norun_inference \
         --json_path=/root/af_input/$INPUT_JSON \
         --model_dir=/root/models \
         --db_dir=/root/public_databases \
         --output_dir=/root/af_output
    ```
    
4. Write and submit a batch script for running inference.

>     AlphaFold 3 runs best on GPUs with CUDA Capability > 7.x. When writing

Reviewer 2: Maybe add a link to https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-gpus?

>     your batch script for inference, you should include a constraint for the

Reviewer 2: I would add a link to https://www.sherlock.stanford.edu/docs/user-guide/gpu/#gpu-types or  https://www.sherlock.stanford.edu/docs/advanced-topics/node-features/#available-features maybe?

Reviewer: Good point. We can add those links.

    GPU type. You can use the following batch script as a template. 

    In order to run the inference step on your particular sequence of interest,
    you will need to modify the bash variable `DATA_JSON` with the directory and
    filename of the data `.json` file created during the pipeline step. The data
    directory and file are located in your `af_output` directory. In the
    template example below the data directory and file is `/2pv7/2pv7_data.json`.
    
    ```
    #!/bin/bash
    #
    #SBATCH --partition=gpu
    #SBATCH --cpus-per-task=8
    #SBATCH --mem=12G
    #SBATCH --gpus=1
    #SBATCH --constraint=GPU_SKU:H100_SXM5
    #SBATCH --time=0-00:10:00

    # model and database paths variables
    MODEL_PARAMS_PATH=$SCRATCH/af3_model
    DB_PATH=$SCRATCH/af3_db
    DATA_JSON=/2pv7/2pv7_data.json

>     # run alphafold3 singularity container

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    # run alphafold3 apptainer container
    apptainer run \
```

    singularity run \
         --nv \
         --env JAX_TRACEBACK_FILTERING=off \
         --bind $SCRATCH/af_input:/root/af_input \
         --bind $SCRATCH/af_output:/root/af_output \
         --bind $MODEL_PARAMS_PATH:/root/models \
         --bind $DB_PATH:/root/public_databases \
         af3.sif \
         --norun_data_pipeline \
         --json_path=/root/af_output/$DATA_JSON \
         --model_dir=/root/models \
         --output_dir=/root/af_output
    ```

> ### Best Practices

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

### Best Practices
```

Reviewer: Fixed on gancayco fork post merge.

1. Using `dcp` to maintain your in Databases to `$SCRATCH` or `$GROUP_SCRATCH`

    Stanford Research Computing maintains a copy of the AlphaFold 3 database within
    the Oak Common Datasets Repository. We recommend, however, intially downloading
    the AlphaFold 3 database files directly from Google DeepMind to a scratch directory.
    This reduces the traffic on the network between Oak and Sherlock and is typically
    faster than  a direct copy. Unmodified files within `$SCRATCH` and `$GROUP_SCRATCH`
    are purged every 90 days. In order to maintain a complete database you can include
    the `dcp` command in your pipeline and inference sbatch scripts, which compares
    your `$SCRATCH` databases with those on Oak and automatically copies over any
    missing files.

    The `dcp` command is located in the `mpifileutils` module. mpiFileUtils is a
    suite of MPI-based tools used to manage large datasets. `dcp` functions similar to
    `cp` but can leverage multiple cpu cores to copy files faster. Here is an example usage for an AlphaFold database located in `$SCRATCH`.
 

>    ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    ```
```

    module load system mpifileutils
    srun -n $SLURM_TASKS_PER_NODE dcp --quite /oak/stanford/datasets/common/alphafold3 $SCRATCH/af3_db
    ```

    Please keep in mind that running `dcp` will increase the runtime of your job 
    depending on how many files need to be re-copied. You can also run the `dcp` 
    command separately and periodically from its own sbatch script. 

2. Running on GPUs with CUDA Capability 8.x or higher

>    The singularity container has been tested extensively on Sherlock GPU's with 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   The apptainer container has been tested extensively on Sherlock GPU's with 
```

   CUDA capability 8.x or higher. These include H100, L40S, RTX 3090, A100, and 
   A40 model GPU's. New models, such as the H100 and L40S, produce the fastest 
   runtimes, with older models taking slightly longer. Consumer grade GPU's, such
   as the RTX 3090, are also sequence limited due to lower GPU memory.

   To run exclusively on a particular GPU model, you can use the SLURM `--constraint`
   option. This option takes a node's feature as an argument and sets it as a requirement
   of the job. Use the Sherlock utility `sh_node_feat -h` to see a list of available
   node features.
   

>    Multiple job constraints can also be specified with AND (&) and OR (|) operators. For example, 

Reviewer 2: Or maybe also use the `GPU_CC` node feature, that directly maps to GPU compute capabilities?
Like
```
#SBATCH --constraint="GPU_CC:8.9|GPU_CC:9.0"
```

   if you are submitting an inference job to the queue and want to run from a larger pool of
   GPU resources, you can specify both H100 or L40S GPU's:
   ```
   #SBATCH --constraint="GPU_SKU:H100_SXM5|GPU_SKU:L40S"
   ```

3. Running on GPUs with CUDA Capability 7.x or lower

   Successful inference runs on GPU's with CUDA capabilty 7.x or lower are limited
   by sequence length and GPU memory. If you do wish to run an inference job on an
   older GPU, the singularity container contains logic to test for the computate
   capability of the available GPU and set the appropriate environmental variables
   before running AlphaFold 3. A successful run, however, is not guarenteed. To specify a 
   particular GPU use the SLURM `--constraint` option mentioned above.

> 4. Notes on Singularity Container

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Notes on Apptainer containers
```

>    On Sherlock, the prefered method for running AlphaFold 3 is from a Singularity 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   On Sherlock, the prefered method for running AlphaFold 3 is from an Apptainer 
```

Reviewer: Fixed on gancayco fork post merge.

>    container. The Singularity definition file (`af3.def`) SRC provides is modified

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   container. The Apptainer definition file (`af3.def`) SRC provides is modified
```

   from the Docker file that Google DeepMind's publishes with AlphaFold 3. SRC's 
   definition file takes into account the heterogenatity of the Sherlock cluster, and 
   provides logic to determine which environment variables need to be set based on the 
   compute capability of the available GPU. 

   AlphaFold 3 reads and write to several directories during runtime such as `af_input`,
   `af_output`, `af3_model`, and `af3_db` directories. In order to run from a container, 
   the necessary directories on Sherlock's filesystem need to be bound to the filesystem
   within the container; this the purpose of `--bind` flags in the sbatch scripts above.

   The container also runs AlphaFold 3 using the `%runscript` section option. The contents
   of the `%runscript` section are executed when the container image (af3.sif) is run with 

>    `singularity run`. This is different from the typical usage of Singularity containers, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   `apptainer run`. This is different from the typical usage of Apptainer containers, 
```

   where software within the container are explicitly called during runtime.

[comment]: #  (link URLs -----------------------------------------------------)

[url_modules]:        /docs/software/list.md
[url_af]:             https://deepmind.google/technologies/alphafold/
[url_boltz1]:         https://github.com/jwohlwend/boltz

> [url_

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
